No less video we saw that we were making search request for our API.
Way too often so in this video we're going to figure out how to somehow fix this behavior.
Just make sure it's really crystal clear what we're going to try to do.
Let me show you a couple of quick diagrams.
So this is our current behavior right now.
Every single time there's a key press we do a search to our API and this is not ideal.
This is not what we want.
So instead this is a little bit closer to the experience that we want to have inside of application.
We want to allow the user to press the key inside that input as many times as they want.
And only after we go through about one second or so of nothing happening do we want to eventually call
the search function.
So in other words let the user press as many times as they want.
If they then stop for one second then go ahead and call search and there's two ways that we can implement
this functionality.
We can add either add in a javascript library that will do this for us automatically or we can write
out some code where we will just figure out how to do it ourselves.
And I bet you can guess which we're going to do.
We're going to figure out how to implement this from scratch on our own.
It's actually a little bit simpler than you might think but to implement this we first need to get a
little bit of background on the set timeout function.
Chances are you've already taken a look at the set time out and function in javascript before.
I just want to give you a quick recap on how set time out works in general so I'm going to write out
a little bit of test code inside my console.
Back over here inside my console inside my browser I'm going to use the set timeout function I can use
it by calling set timeout.
I'm going to pass in an era function to it as the first argument and inside of that arrow function I'll
do a console log of hi there like so the second argument to the set timeout function is a delay that's
going to specify how long we want to wait before we run that function right there.
The one with the console log though as the second argument to set timeout I'm going to put in 1000 which
means that I want to wait one second or 1000 milliseconds before executing that function.
So if I run that I'll wait for about a second and then I see a high there appear I can adjust it up
to five seconds and that will wait five seconds before that function is invoked and the important thing
to keep in mind around set time out is that any time we call it we get back an integer value.
In the first case we got out of set time out a value of one in the next case we got out a value of two.
These numbers are essentially identifiers and they identify the timer that we just created if we want
to we can call the clear timeout function to stop that pending timer and prevent that function from
being called I want to set up another timeout and I'm going to give it a timeout of 10 seconds like
so that's going to give me more than enough time to write out some code very quickly to clear the timer
that I set up with this line of code so I'm going to run that and then very quickly write out clear
timeout with three like so when I call clear time out of three that means look at the timer that was
created with the idea of three to the timer that was created an idea of three was this one right here
it's on saying stop that running timer and don't call that function ever even after 10 seconds pass
let's just a quick reminder on how set time out in clear time network.
Now that we were we understand or have a quick reminder on that let's go back over to our code and we're
going to add in a little bit of code to add in this behavior right here OK.
So back inside of my index dot j ust file I'm going to go down to where we added that event listener
so the function that we kind of want to prevent from being executed is this whole function right here.
We want to stop that from ever running.
If a user is pressing on the keyboard too often so to add that in I'm going to first assign that function
to a new variable I'm going to cut the function out right above I'm going to create a new variable called
on input and assign that function to it all then pass that variable as the second argument into the
event listener.
So on input like so what we have right here is 100 percent equivalent to the code we had before now
we can add in some logic to actually make sure that we don't call input too often though to do so inside
of an input.
I'm going to first right above the function to clear a variable that I'll call timeout I.D. like so
we're eventually going to take one those ideas that we get from calling set time out like the ones we
saw back over here 1 2 and 3 and we're going to assign one of those ideas to this variable then inside
this function we're going to wrap the fetched to call with a set time out so let's say set time out
like so I'll move my call to fetch data into the timeout function then as the second argument to set
time outs I'm gonna put in 1000 milliseconds.
So if we ran our code right now the only effect would be to make sure that we introduce a delay of 1000
seconds receiving 1000 milliseconds between typing something and actually calling batch data.
That's the only change that would occur right now.
Well we want to make sure that we don't run any code until the user stops typing for some amount of
time to implement that behavior.
I'm going to take the timer.
It gets returned from calling set time out an assignment assign it to timeout idea like so.
Now here's the magic line of code right above that.
So between on inputs and where we assign that timeout I.D. I'm going to add in an if statement I'm going
to say if I'm at I.D. then clear Timeout timeout I.D. That's the magic part right there now you can
kind of imagine what is going on behind the scenes here.
We're going to be calling on input.
Many many times in a row just imagine a user typing into the input like the word Avengers.
However many characters that is we're going to call on input that number of times the very first time
that on input is going to be called we're going to enter this function.
We're going to take a look and see if timeout I.D. is defined a very first time that we call this function
timeout an I.D. is going to be undefined.
So we're going to skip over this if statement entirely.
We're going to go down to set time out and set up a timer and say in one second call batch data that's
the very first key press.
We're then going to assign that timer to timeout I.D. users then going to press on the second key on
their keyboard.
The second time they press the key.
We're going to once again enter this function.
And now when we hit the if statement timeout idea will be defined.
So we're going to enter the if statement and we're going to stop that pending timer we're going to stop
the existing one and we're going to set up a brand new one of the brand new one is going to have a new
value that it's going to call fetch data with that process is then going to repeat itself over and over
and over again until we eventually go for a full second before calling on input again.
In that scenario we're not going to call clear time out this time out is going to execute and fetch
data will be called let's save this and test out our code and see how it's doing.
I got to go back over to the network tab over here.
I'm going to search for Avengers against all put in Avengers like so and have to wait for about a second
after my last key press before I actually see a request being issued which is exactly what we want.
It's now a user can you typing in here they can make as many typos as they want.
And we're not burning through all of our credits on our API that looks pretty good.
Now that's going to mention is that we can very easily make sure that we execute this search a little
bit more quickly by just adjusting that 1000 milliseconds right there so we can instead go to 500 and
now we are going to do the search twice as quickly after the user stops typing.
Now I can put in Avengers and I'll see this search up here right away.
OK.
So this looks pretty good.
Let's take a quick pause right here and continue in the next video.